A database is an organized collection of data,
generally stored and accessed electronically from a computer system.
Database and data warehouse are two different storage types.
It is important for us to understand differences between the two.
DBs are to record data from an application,
whereas data warehouses are to analyze the data of an enterprise.
DBs might store detailed data,
whereas a data warehouse might have summarized data.
DBs are used for operations and transactions.
Data warehouses are used for business data analysis.
DBs get data in real-time,
whereas data warehouse needs to be refreshed to get latest data.
DBs are associated with a single application.
Data warehouse affect from multiple applications.
To summarize it all,
data warehouse are required to store
large quantities of historical data and provide fast,
complex queries across all the data,
mostly using all apps.
DBs focus on storing current transactional data to enable
fast access to specific data for business processes.
This is how OLTPs work.
DBs can be categorized into two major categories: SQL DBs and NoSQL DBs.
SQL DBs are classic category of DBs,
they store data in tables,
data is relational in nature,
can be queried using SQL,
schemas need to be defined.
Schema is nothing but organization of data as blueprint of how the DB is constructed.
Common SQL DBs are MS SQL Server, Oracle, and MySQL.
There are four major categories of NoSQL DBs: Document-oriented,
columnar DB, key-value DB, and graph DB.
Document-oriented DBs, they do not have fixed schema,
data is stored in JSON documents,
each document can have different fields.
Common examples of document-oriented DBs are,
MongoDB, CouchDB, or Document DB.
In columnar DB, data is stored in
columns instead of how it is stored in rows in relational DBs.
Column-based queries can run fast on these DBs.
It is much more easier in columnar DBs to
add columns than their counterpart, relational DBs.
One common example of most popular columnar DB is Cassandra.
In key-value DBs, values are stored with unique keys.
These DBs are much simpler,
scalable for reads and writes.
Example of key-value DBs are Redis and Amazon DynamoDB.
In graph DBs data is stored as network.
These DBs focus on connections between data points and are
used for analysis of relationships between data points.
Examples of graph DBs are InfiniteGraph and Neo4j.